[Music]
it's just a tiny crack
not a big deal right true if it wasn't a
fracture in a stone wall of a gigantic
dam
it prevents trillions of gallons of
water from wiping several cities and
towns off the face of the earth
unfortunately the crack goes unnoticed
under the immense pressure it starts
growing
inch by inch almost imperceptibly
still not a big deal just a sign the
material is wearing out
but then the inevitable happens an
earthquake isn't even that strong
five on the richter scale most people
sound asleep in their beds that night
failed to notice the ground shaking
normally the dam would easily withstand
this natural disaster
but only if it was as strong as it used
to be
and it's not the earthquake becomes the
last draw
the dam starts to break apart first
several thin streams of water rush down
the stone wall
the cracks keep growing chunks of
concrete fly high into the air
under the pressure of water that's
trying to escape its confines
finally with a horrifying crash the wall
gives way
giant waves of water gushed toward the
first sleeping city on its way
it's early morning hours people unaware
of the approaching wall of water
have no time to evacuate or even prepare
for the disaster
when the blood curdling roaring draws
them out of their slumber
they can only panic men and women swoop
their kids up
and frantically search for high ground
the streets get
instantly flooded the water's littered
with books from local libraries
unsliced foot long bread rolls from
subways stuffed
toys clothes garden furniture an
enormous wall of water like a river
is moving further submerging everything
on its way
it leaves nearly nothing in its wake no
trees no buildings
no parks no playgrounds just a bit of
grass
a tsunami-like wave wipes out millions
of acres of farmland
and since it's the time right before the
fall harvest millions of people go days
and even weeks with very little food the
possibility of famine becomes
unnervingly real the dam's also the main
hydroelectric power station in the
region
its failure leads to massive power
outages
people miles away from the area hit by
the disaster
have no electricity it means no fresh
water
problems with food failing cell networks
you name it
the water from the broken dam floods
dozens of towns and cities within 24
hours
along the way it sweeps away bridges
wipes off highways
tears pipelines an area as big as the
entire state of new jersey
gets covered with water at least one
foot deep
many places though are under 16 feet of
water
wastewater treatment plants in all of
the affected cities are flooded
it adds sewage to the flowing streams
this
along with the substances from several
damaged chemical plants
turns the water into a mixture of toxic
stuff
days later everything's still muddy
there's no fresh water
people start to get ill it's almost
impossible to evacuate them from the
affected areas
the mud prevents rescuers from using
wheeled vehicles
boats are also useless because most of
the water is already drained
low-lying towns and cities with millions
of inhabitants
become deserted well that wasn't much
fun
if you think this catastrophic scenario
can only happen in a natural disaster
movie
i have some bad news for you among 57
000 large dams in the world there are
dozens that can fail at any moment
with no or very little warning
weeks-long heavy torrential rains in
china in june 2020
led to the worst flooding in recent
years the yangtze river was way above
the flood level
and the three gorges dam one of the
largest in the world
had a hard time trying to manage the
strain
the building pressure started to deform
it experts were even afraid the huge
construction could fall apart
some of the water was released to
relieve the pressure the situation was
no joke
if the three gorges dam fails more than
400 million people downstream will be in
harm's way
unfortunately this possibility is
alarmingly real
if smaller and older dams upriver fail
the main one won't be able to withstand
the pressure
the fourth largest in the middle east
the two-mile-long mosul dam was built on
unstable ground that's why the massive
construction began to move
this movement was incredibly slow but
for a dam of such
size it could mean an upcoming disaster
if a mere 26 percent of the dam failed
it would cause a flood of catastrophic
proportions
it was clear the dam was in dire need of
repair
in the process constructors were
injecting the dam with a cement mix
now several years later the dam isn't in
danger of collapsing anymore
with 200 new mechanisms it's way more
advanced than before
and still some experts are sure all
these measures are only a temporary
solution
they say the maintenance can make the
dam's lifespan longer
but it's just delaying the disaster six
million people living along the tigris
banks and further
should be ready to evacuate at any
moment
if a dam across the periar river in
kerala india
collapses three and a half million
people downstream will be in great
danger
at risk of being swept away by a raging
torrent
and the dam is bound to crumble sooner
or later
it was built more than a century ago the
materials it was made of have become
weaker and started to break up already
40 years ago
the construction had minor cracks and
leaks that's when experts found out the
dam
wouldn't be able to live through even an
earthquake of six on the richter scale
and earthquakes are very common for that
area luckily none of them have been
strong enough to cause serious damage to
the monster construction
yet the attics and barker dams were
built to the west of houston
in the 1940s they were supposed to hold
back regular torrential rains
and make sure the city wasn't wiped off
the map
for more than 70 years the dams have
been preventing huge amounts of water
from reaching flood-prone buffalo bayou
it has saved the country 4.6 billion
dollars
but these days the dams have become high
risk
rather old they're wearing out already
in 2009
the dams started to fail after more than
nine inches of rain fell in 24 hours
after that downpour the attics and
barker dams were named among the
country's six most
hazardous during tropical storm harvey
in 2017
the water in both attics and barker
reservoirs over top the banks for the
first time in history
thousands of cubic feet of water per
second rushed into the neighborhoods
flooding hundreds of homes with more
than five feet of water
like the house i grew up in it was
terrible
but if the dam fails it'll dwarf
everything that's happened before
the fort peck dam is around 80 years old
some experts consider it one of the most
hazardous in north america
the main problem the dam's construction
it was built out of a mixture of water
and mud that was brought from both
upstream and
downstream of the place this technique
isn't safe for damn construction
and there have been cases where dams
built this way collapsed
if the fort peck dam failed because of a
natural disaster
like a flood or an earthquake there
would only be several hours to evacuate
people
then the dam would break apart and the
water would come
hard and fast the scale of the disaster
would depend on how full the dam was at
the time it failed
in the worst case scenario the water
would completely flood
12 towns and cities within 33 hours
it would also knock down five other dams
on its way
along with bridges highways and
pipelines
people living in a small town wedged
between the sierra nevada's steep slopes
know their fate would be tragic should
the dam on lake isabella
just a mile up the road fail if the
lake's full at that moment
nothing will save their businesses and
lives
the stakes are high not only for four
000 people living
near the dam but also for 340 000
residents of bakersfield 40 miles down
the kern river canyon
several years ago the 67 year old dam
had a couple of huge
problems it was eroding internally
during extreme flooding water could flow
over the dam's top
it was also built directly along an
active fault line
in other words an earthquake can happen
there at any time
and the not so strong dam won't
withstand such a natural disaster
right now the dam is getting reinforced
and the repair
project should be completed in 2022